feat: add documentation on debug features of Sumo Logic Kubernetes Collection (#3665)
SumoLogic/sumologic-documentation: docs/send-data/kubernetes/troubleshoot-collection.md

For more information, see [Setting different resources on different nodes for logs collector](/docs/send-data/kubernetes/best-practices/#setting-different-resources-on-different-nodes-for-logs-collector).

### Check logs body

You can print logs on stdout of logs collector and logs metadata, and validate if they are correct. It may happen that logs are ingested, but with different metadata than you expect them.

In order to print them on stdout, two steps are required:

> 1. Disable ingesting logs from logs related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disable log ingestion from logs-related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
```

> 1. Disable ingesting logs from logs related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      logs:
>        metadata:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
>    Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
> 
> 2. Enable printing logs on stdout for logs related pods, by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      logs:
>        metadata:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
> 3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disable ingesting logs from logs related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike.
   - Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
     ```yaml
     debug:
       logs:
         metadata:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
         collector:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
     ```
   - Then, update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
2. Enable printing logs on stdout for logs related pods by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
   ```yaml
      debug:
        logs:
          metadata:
            print: true
            stopLogsIngestion: true
          collector:
            print: true
            stopLogsIngestion: true
      ```
3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.
```

:::note
It's important to perform first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid situation in which collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.
:::

### See logs being send to Sumo Logic

> You can use Sumo Logic Mock, to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use Sumo Logic Mock to see what data has been sent to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:
```

```yaml
debug:
  sumologicMock:
    enabled: true
    deployment:
      extraArgs:
        - --print-logs  # print received logs on stdout  
        - --print-headers  # print headers on stdout
  logs:
    metadata:
      # enable logs forwarding
      forwardToSumologicMock: true
```

> and then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:
```

where `metadata.name` is the value from Argo Application manifest.

### Check metrics content

> You can print metrics on stdout of metrics collector and metrics metadata, and validate if they are correct. It may happen that metrics are ingested, but with different metadata than you expect them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can print metrics on stdout of metrics collector and metrics metadata, and validate if they are correct. It may happen that metrics are ingested, but with different metadata than you expect.
```

In order to print them on stdout, two steps are required:

> 1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      metrics:
>        metadata:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
>    Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike.
   - Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
   ```yaml
   debug:
     metrics:
       metadata:
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       collector:
         stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```
   - Then, update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
```

> 1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      metrics:
>        metadata:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
>    Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
> 
> 2. Enable printing metrics on stdout for metrics related pods, by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      metrics:
>        metadata:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike.
   - Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
     ```yaml
     debug:
       metrics:
         metadata:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
         collector:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
     ```
   - Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
2. Enable printing metrics on stdout for metrics related pods by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
   ```yaml
   debug:
     metrics:
       metadata:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       collector:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```

```

> 1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      metrics:
>        metadata:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
>    Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
> 
> 2. Enable printing metrics on stdout for metrics related pods, by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
> 
>    ```yaml
>    debug:
>      metrics:
>        metadata:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>        collector:
>          print: true
>          stopLogsIngestion: true
>    ```
> 
> 3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Disable ingesting logs from metrics related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike.
   - Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:
     ```yaml
     debug:
       metrics:
         metadata:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
         collector:
           stopLogsIngestion: true
     ```
   - Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.
2. Enable printing metrics on stdout for metrics related pods by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:
   ```yaml
   debug:
     metrics:
       metadata:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       collector:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```
3. To revert your changes, perform first step as-is, then after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.
```

> 3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. To revert your changes, perform first step as-is, then after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.
```

:::note
It's important to perform first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all logs collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid situation in which logs collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.
:::

### See metrics being send to Sumo Logic

> You can use Sumo Logic Mock, to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use Sumo Logic Mock to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:
```

```yaml
debug:
  sumologicMock:
    enabled: true
    deployment:
      extraArgs:
        - --print-metrics  # print received metrics on stdout  
        - --print-headers  # print headers on stdout
  metrics:
    metadata:
      # enable metrics forwarding
      forwardToSumologicMock: true
```

> and then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:
```

```

## Collecting Spans and Traces

### Check instrumentation content

> You can print spans on stdout of instrumentation related pods, and validate if they are correct. It may happen that spans are ingested, but with different metadata than you expect them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can print spans on stdout of instrumentation related pods, and validate if they are correct. It may happen that spans are ingested, but with different metadata than you expect.
```

In order to print them on stdout, two steps are required:

1. Disable ingesting logs from instrumentation related pods. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   debug:
     instrumentation:
       otelcolInstrumentation:
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       tracesGateway:
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       tracesSampler:
         stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```

   Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.

2. Enable printing spans on stdout for instrumentation related pods, by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   debug:
     instrumentation:
       otelcolInstrumentation:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       tracesGateway:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
       tracesSampler:
         print: true
         stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```

3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.

:::note

> It's important to perform first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all logs collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid situation in which logs collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's important to perform the first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all logs collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid the situation in which logs collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.
```

:::

### See traces being send to Sumo Logic

> You can use Sumo Logic Mock, to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use Sumo Logic Mock to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:
```

```yaml
debug:
  sumologicMock:
    enabled: true
    deployment:
      extraArgs:

>         - --print-spans    # print reveived spans on stdout  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - --print-spans    # print received spans on stdout  
```

        - --print-headers  # print headers on stdout
  instrumentation:
    tracesSampler:
      # enable spans forwarding
      forwardToSumologicMock: true
```

> and then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:
```

2024-02-13T14:19:56.412Z DEBUG [sumologic_mock::router::otlp] Span => name: ancestor-6, span_id: 2ef9759def53f709, parent_span_id: a6225d27fd7fec15, trace_id: f7563cc4ef721e1d14974eea71e20b55
2024-02-13T14:19:56.412Z DEBUG [sumologic_mock::router::otlp] Span => name: ancestor-7, span_id: 34b7b7f27d6a9d86, parent_span_id: 2ef9759def53f709, trace_id: f7563cc4ef721e1d14974eea71e20b55
```

## Collecting events

### Check events body

You can print events on stdout of events collector pod, and validate if they are correct.

In order to print them on stdout, two steps are required:

1. Disable ingesting logs from events collector. This is required to prevent logs ingest spike. Add the following configuration to `user-values.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   debug:
     events:
       stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```

   Then update your collection and wait for all logs collector pods to be redeployed.

2. Enable printing events on stdout for events collector, by adding the following to `user-values.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   debug:
     events:
       print: true
       stopLogsIngestion: true
   ```

> 3. To revert changes, please perform first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. To revert changes, please perform the first step as it is, and after configuration has been propagated to all pods, you can remove all configuration added in this section from the `user-values.yaml`.
```

:::note

> It's important to perform first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid situation in which collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's important to perform the first step exactly as it is, especially waiting for all collector pods to apply new configuration. We want to avoid the situation in which collector pods are picking up debugging logs and sending them to Sumo Logic, as it may increase your costs.
```

:::

### See events being send to Sumo Logic

> You can use Sumo Logic Mock, to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use Sumo Logic Mock to see what data has been send to Sumo Logic. In order to do that, add the following to your `user-values.yaml`:
```

```yaml
debug:
  sumologicMock:
    enabled: true
    deployment:
      extraArgs:
        - --print-logs  # print received events/logs on stdout  
        - --print-headers  # print headers on stdout
  events:
    # enable logs forwarding
    forwardToSumologicMock: true
```

> and then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then look at the Sumo Logic Mock logs:
```

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/opentelemetry-operator-0.44.0/charts/opentelemetry-operator/crds/crd-opentelemetry.io_opampbridges.yaml
```

## Using Sumo Logic Mock

> Sumo Logic Mock is debugging tool, which helps to see what exactly is being send from the Sumo Logic Collection to Sumo Logic. It may help with finding if there are any missing metrics, logs, traces or parts of them like labels or metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sumo Logic Mock is debugging tool, which helps to see what exactly is being sent from the Sumo Logic Collection to Sumo Logic. It may help with finding if there are any missing metrics, logs, traces, or parts of them like labels or metadata.
```

:::note

> Sumo Logic Mock is treated as experimental tool and it may significally change between every release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sumo Logic Mock is treated as an experimental tool and it may significantly change between every release.
```

:::

### Estimate ingestion using Sumo Logic Mock in local mode

> Sumo Logic mock can be used to estimate how many logs and metrics is going to be send to the Sumo Logic without even having any Sumo Logic account.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sumo Logic Mock can be used to estimate how many logs and metrics are going to be sent to Sumo Logic without even having any Sumo Logic account.
```
